site/content/en/latest/tasks/extensibility/extension-server.md, before:

---
title: "Envoy Gateway Extension Server"
linkTitle: "Extension Server"
---

This task explains how to extend Envoy Gateway using an Extension Server. Envoy Gateway
can be configured to call an external server over gRPC with the xDS configuration _before_ 
it is sent to Envoy Proxy. The external server can modify the provided configuration 
programmatically using any semantics supported by the [xDS][] API.

Using an extension server allows vendors to add xDS configuration that Envoy Gateway itself
doesn't support with a very high level of control over the generated xDS configuration.

**Note:** Modifying the xDS configuration generated by Envoy Gateway may break functionality
configured by native Envoy Gateway means. Like other cases where the xDS configuration
is modified outside of Envoy Gateway's control, this is risky and should be tested thoroughly,
especially when using the same extension server across different Envoy Gateway versions.

## Introduction

One of the Envoy Gateway project goals is to "provide a common foundation for vendors to
build value-added products without having to re-engineer fundamental interactions". The
Envoy Gateway Extension Server provides a mechanism where Envoy Gateway tracks all provider
resources and then calls a set of hooks that allow the generated xDS configuration to be
modified before it is sent to Envoy Proxy. See the [design documentation][] for full details.

## Extension Hooks Overview

Envoy Gateway provides several extension hooks that are called at different stages of the xDS translation process. These hooks allow extensions to modify various aspects of the generated xDS configuration:

### Available Hooks

| Hook Type | Hook Method Name | Purpose | Resources Modified | Execution Context |
|-----------|------------------|---------|-------------------|-------------------|
| `Route` | `PostRouteModifyHook` | Modify individual routes | Single `envoy.config.route.v3.Route` | Per-route, only for routes with extension filters |
| `Cluster` | `PostClusterModifyHook` | Modify clusters for custom backends | Single `envoy.config.cluster.v3.Cluster` | Per-cluster, only for custom backend clusters |
| `VirtualHost` | `PostVirtualHostModifyHook` | Modify virtual hosts and add custom routes | Single `envoy.config.route.v3.VirtualHost` | Per-virtual-host |
| `HTTPListener` | `PostHTTPListenerModifyHook` | Modify HTTP listeners | Single `envoy.config.listener.v3.Listener` | Per-listener |
| `Translation` | `PostTranslateModifyHook` | Global modification of all xDS resources | All clusters, secrets, listeners, and routes | Once per translation cycle |

### Hook Execution Order

The hooks are executed in the following order during xDS translation:

1. **Route Processing Phase**
   - `Route` hook (`PostRouteModifyHook`): Called for each route that has extension filters attached
   - `Cluster` hook (`PostClusterModifyHook`): Called for each cluster generated from custom backend references

2. **Virtual Host Processing Phase**
   - `VirtualHost` hook (`PostVirtualHostModifyHook`): Called for each virtual host after all routes are processed

3. **Listener Processing Phase**
   - `HTTPListener` hook (`PostHTTPListenerModifyHook`): Called for each HTTP listener after virtual hosts are configured

4. **Final Translation Phase**
   - `Translation` hook (`PostTranslateModifyHook`): Called once with all generated clusters, secrets, listeners, and routes

### Hook Details

#### Route Hook (`PostRouteModifyHook`)

- **When called**: After each individual route is generated from an HTTPRoute with extension filters
- **Input**: Single route, hostnames, and extension resources from the HTTPRoute
- **Output**: Modified route
- **Use cases**: Add route-specific filters, modify route configuration, add typed per-filter config

#### Cluster Hook (`PostClusterModifyHook`)

- **When called**: During cluster generation for custom backend references only
- **Input**: Single cluster and extension resources from the backend reference
- **Output**: Modified cluster
- **Use cases**: Configure custom backend clusters, add health checks, modify load balancing

#### VirtualHost Hook (`PostVirtualHostModifyHook`)

- **When called**: After all routes for a virtual host are processed
- **Input**: Complete virtual host with all its routes
- **Output**: Modified virtual host (can add/remove/modify routes)
- **Use cases**: Add virtual host-level configuration, inject additional routes

#### HTTPListener Hook (`PostHTTPListenerModifyHook`)

- **When called**: After listener is fully configured with all virtual hosts
- **Input**: Complete HTTP listener and associated extension policies
- **Output**: Modified listener
- **Use cases**: Add listener filters, modify listener configuration, add authentication

#### Translation Hook (`PostTranslateModifyHook`)

- **When called**: After all individual resources are generated and processed
- **Input**: All clusters, secrets, listeners, and routes, plus extension policies
- **Output**: Complete set of modified resources
- **Use cases**: Global resource injection, cross-resource modifications, cleanup operations

### Configuration

Extensions must specify which hooks they want to use in the `extensionManager.hooks` configuration:

```yaml
extensionManager:
  hooks:
    xdsTranslator:
      post:
        - Route          # Enable route modification hook
        - VirtualHost    # Enable virtual host modification hook
        - HTTPListener   # Enable HTTP listener modification hook
        - Cluster        # Enable cluster modification hook
        - Translation    # Enable global translation hook
```

This task sets up an example extension server that adds the Envoy Proxy Basic Authentication
HTTP filter to all the listeners generated by Envoy Gateway. The example extension server
includes its own CRD which allows defining username/password pairs that will be accepted by
the Envoy Proxy.

**Note:** Envoy Gateway supports adding Basic Authentication to routes using a [SecurityPolicy][].
See [this task](../security/basic-auth) for the preferred way to configure Basic 
Authentication.

## Quickstart

### Prerequisites

{{< boilerplate prerequisites >}}

### Build and run the example Extension Server

Build and deploy the example extension server in the `examples/extension-server` folder into the cluster 
running Envoy Gateway.

* Build the extension server image

  **Note:** The provided `Makefile` builds an image with the name `extension-server:latest`. You may need to create
a different tag for it in order to allow Kubernetes to pull it correctly.

  ```shell
  make image
  ```

* Publish the extension server image in your docker repository

  {{< tabpane text=true >}}
  {{% tab header="local kind server" %}}

  ```shell
  kind load docker-image --name envoy-gateway extension-server:latest
  ```

  {{% /tab %}}
  {{% tab header="other Kubernetes server" %}}

  ```shell
  docker tag extension-server:latest $YOUR_DOCKER_REPO
  docker push $YOUR_DOCKER_REPO
  ```

  {{% /tab %}}
  {{< /tabpane >}}

* Deploy the extension server in your cluster

  If you are using your own docker image repository, make sure to update the `values.yaml` with the correct
image name and tag.

  ```shell
  helm install -n envoy-gateway-system extension-server ./examples/extension-server/charts/extension-server
  ```

### Configure Envoy Gateway

* Grant Envoy Gateway's `ServiceAccount` permission to access the extension server's CRD

  ```shell
  kubectl create clusterrole listener-context-example-status-update \
             --verb=update  \
             --resource=ListenerContextExample/status

  kubectl create clusterrole listener-context-example-viewer \
             --verb=get,list,watch  \
             --resource=ListenerContextExample

  kubectl create clusterrolebinding envoy-gateway-listener-context \
             --clusterrole=listener-context-example-viewer \
             --serviceaccount=envoy-gateway-system:envoy-gateway

  kubectl create clusterrolebinding envoy-gateway-listener-context-status \
             --clusterrole=listener-context-example-status-update \
             --serviceaccount=envoy-gateway-system:envoy-gateway
  ```

* Configure Envoy Gateway to use the Extension Server

  Add the following fragment to Envoy Gateway's configmap:

  ```shell
  cat <<EOF | kubectl apply -f -
  apiVersion: v1
  kind: ConfigMap
  metadata:
    name: envoy-gateway-config
    namespace: envoy-gateway-system
  data:
    envoy-gateway.yaml: |
      apiVersion: gateway.envoyproxy.io/v1alpha1
      kind: EnvoyGateway
      provider:
        type: Kubernetes
      gateway:
        controllerName: gateway.envoyproxy.io/gatewayclass-controller
      extensionManager:
        # Envoy Gateway will watch these resource kinds and use them as extension policies
        # which can be attached to Gateway resources.
        policyResources:
        - group: example.extensions.io
          version: v1alpha1
          kind: ListenerContextExample
        hooks:
          # The type of hooks that should be invoked
          xdsTranslator:
            post:
            - HTTPListener
        service:
          # The service that is hosting the extension server
          fqdn:
            hostname: extension-server.envoy-gateway-system.svc.cluster.local
            port: 5005
  EOF
  ```

  After updating Envoy Gateway's configmap, restart Envoy Gateway.

## Testing

Get the Gateway's address:

```shell
export GATEWAY_HOST=$(kubectl get gateway/eg -o jsonpath='{.status.addresses[0].value}')
```

The extension server adds the Basic Authentication HTTP filter to all listeners configured by 
Envoy Gateway. Initially there are no valid user/password combinations available. Accessing the
example backend should fail with a 401 status:

```console
$ curl -v --header "Host: www.example.com" "http://${GATEWAY_HOST}/example"
...
> GET /example HTTP/1.1
> Host: www.example.com
> User-Agent: curl/7.81.0
> Accept: */*
> 
* Mark bundle as not supporting multiuse
< HTTP/1.1 401 Unauthorized
< www-authenticate: Basic realm="http://www.example.com/example"
< content-length: 58
< content-type: text/plain
< date: Mon, 08 Jul 2024 10:53:11 GMT
< 
...
User authentication failed. Missing username and password.
...
```

Add a new Username/Password combination using the example extension server's CRD:

```shell
kubectl apply -f - << EOF 
apiVersion: example.extensions.io/v1alpha1
kind: ListenerContextExample
metadata:
  name: listeneruser
spec:
  targetRefs:
  - kind: Gateway
    name: eg
    group: gateway.networking.k8s.io
  username: user
  password: p@ssw0rd
EOF
```

Authenticating with this user/password combination will now work.

```console
$ curl -v http://${GATEWAY_HOST}/example  -H "Host: www.example.com"   --user 'user:p@ssw0rd'
...
> GET /example HTTP/1.1
> Host: www.example.com
> Authorization: Basic dXNlcm5hbWU6cEBzc3cwcmQ=
> User-Agent: curl/7.81.0
> Accept: */*
> 
* Mark bundle as not supporting multiuse
< HTTP/1.1 200 OK
< content-type: application/json
< x-content-type-options: nosniff
< date: Mon, 08 Jul 2024 10:56:17 GMT
< content-length: 559
< 
...
 "headers": {
  "Authorization": [
   "Basic dXNlcm5hbWU6cEBzc3cwcmQ="
  ],
  "X-Example-Ext": [
   "user"
  ],
...
```


[xDS]: https://www.envoyproxy.io/docs/envoy/latest/intro/arch_overview/operations/dynamic_configuration
[design documentation]: /contributions/design/extending-envoy-gateway
[SecurityPolicy]: /latest/api/extension_types/#securitypolicy

Commit message:

add option to enable/disable
Signed-off-by: bitliu <bitliu@tencent.com>

site/content/en/latest/tasks/extensibility/extension-server.md, after:

---
title: "Envoy Gateway Extension Server"
linkTitle: "Extension Server"
---

This task explains how to extend Envoy Gateway using an Extension Server. Envoy Gateway
can be configured to call an external server over gRPC with the xDS configuration _before_ 
it is sent to Envoy Proxy. The external server can modify the provided configuration 
programmatically using any semantics supported by the [xDS][] API.

Using an extension server allows vendors to add xDS configuration that Envoy Gateway itself
doesn't support with a very high level of control over the generated xDS configuration.

**Note:** Modifying the xDS configuration generated by Envoy Gateway may break functionality
configured by native Envoy Gateway means. Like other cases where the xDS configuration
is modified outside of Envoy Gateway's control, this is risky and should be tested thoroughly,
especially when using the same extension server across different Envoy Gateway versions.

## Introduction

One of the Envoy Gateway project goals is to "provide a common foundation for vendors to
build value-added products without having to re-engineer fundamental interactions". The
Envoy Gateway Extension Server provides a mechanism where Envoy Gateway tracks all provider
resources and then calls a set of hooks that allow the generated xDS configuration to be
modified before it is sent to Envoy Proxy. See the [design documentation][] for full details.

## Extension Hooks Overview

Envoy Gateway provides several extension hooks that are called at different stages of the xDS translation process. These hooks allow extensions to modify various aspects of the generated xDS configuration:

### Available Hooks

| Hook Type | Hook Method Name | Purpose | Resources Modified | Execution Context |
|-----------|------------------|---------|-------------------|-------------------|
| `Route` | `PostRouteModifyHook` | Modify individual routes | Single `envoy.config.route.v3.Route` | Per-route, only for routes with extension filters |
| `Cluster` | `PostClusterModifyHook` | Modify clusters for custom backends | Single `envoy.config.cluster.v3.Cluster` | Per-cluster, only for custom backend clusters |
| `VirtualHost` | `PostVirtualHostModifyHook` | Modify virtual hosts and add custom routes | Single `envoy.config.route.v3.VirtualHost` | Per-virtual-host |
| `HTTPListener` | `PostHTTPListenerModifyHook` | Modify HTTP listeners | Single `envoy.config.listener.v3.Listener` | Per-listener |
| `Translation` | `PostTranslateModifyHook` | Global modification of all xDS resources | All clusters, secrets, listeners, and routes | Once per translation cycle |

### Hook Execution Order

The hooks are executed in the following order during xDS translation:

1. **Route Processing Phase**
   - `Route` hook (`PostRouteModifyHook`): Called for each route that has extension filters attached
   - `Cluster` hook (`PostClusterModifyHook`): Called for each cluster generated from custom backend references

2. **Virtual Host Processing Phase**
   - `VirtualHost` hook (`PostVirtualHostModifyHook`): Called for each virtual host after all routes are processed

3. **Listener Processing Phase**
   - `HTTPListener` hook (`PostHTTPListenerModifyHook`): Called for each HTTP listener after virtual hosts are configured

4. **Final Translation Phase**
   - `Translation` hook (`PostTranslateModifyHook`): Called once with all generated clusters, secrets, listeners, and routes

### Hook Details

#### Route Hook (`PostRouteModifyHook`)

- **When called**: After each individual route is generated from an HTTPRoute with extension filters
- **Input**: Single route, hostnames, and extension resources from the HTTPRoute
- **Output**: Modified route
- **Use cases**: Add route-specific filters, modify route configuration, add typed per-filter config

#### Cluster Hook (`PostClusterModifyHook`)

- **When called**: During cluster generation for custom backend references only
- **Input**: Single cluster and extension resources from the backend reference
- **Output**: Modified cluster
- **Use cases**: Configure custom backend clusters, add health checks, modify load balancing

#### VirtualHost Hook (`PostVirtualHostModifyHook`)

- **When called**: After all routes for a virtual host are processed
- **Input**: Complete virtual host with all its routes
- **Output**: Modified virtual host (can add/remove/modify routes)
- **Use cases**: Add virtual host-level configuration, inject additional routes

#### HTTPListener Hook (`PostHTTPListenerModifyHook`)

- **When called**: After listener is fully configured with all virtual hosts
- **Input**: Complete HTTP listener and associated extension policies
- **Output**: Modified listener
- **Use cases**: Add listener filters, modify listener configuration, add authentication

#### Translation Hook (`PostTranslateModifyHook`)

- **When called**: After all individual resources are generated and processed
- **Input**: All clusters, secrets, listeners, and routes, plus extension policies
- **Output**: Complete set of modified resources
- **Use cases**: Global resource injection, cross-resource modifications, cleanup operations

### Configuration

Extensions must specify which hooks they want to use in the `extensionManager.hooks` configuration:

```yaml
extensionManager:
  hooks:
    xdsTranslator:
      post:
        - Route          # Enable route modification hook
        - VirtualHost    # Enable virtual host modification hook
        - HTTPListener   # Enable HTTP listener modification hook
        - Cluster        # Enable cluster modification hook
        - Translation    # Enable global translation hook
    # Enable listeners and routes in PostTranslateModifyHook
    # When enabled, the Translation hook receives all four resource types:
    # clusters, secrets, listeners, and routes
    # Default: false (for backward compatibility)
    enablePostTranslateListenersAndRoutes: true
```

This task sets up an example extension server that adds the Envoy Proxy Basic Authentication
HTTP filter to all the listeners generated by Envoy Gateway. The example extension server
includes its own CRD which allows defining username/password pairs that will be accepted by
the Envoy Proxy.

**Note:** Envoy Gateway supports adding Basic Authentication to routes using a [SecurityPolicy][].
See [this task](../security/basic-auth) for the preferred way to configure Basic 
Authentication.

## Quickstart

### Prerequisites

{{< boilerplate prerequisites >}}

### Build and run the example Extension Server

Build and deploy the example extension server in the `examples/extension-server` folder into the cluster 
running Envoy Gateway.

* Build the extension server image

  **Note:** The provided `Makefile` builds an image with the name `extension-server:latest`. You may need to create
a different tag for it in order to allow Kubernetes to pull it correctly.

  ```shell
  make image
  ```

* Publish the extension server image in your docker repository

  {{< tabpane text=true >}}
  {{% tab header="local kind server" %}}

  ```shell
  kind load docker-image --name envoy-gateway extension-server:latest
  ```

  {{% /tab %}}
  {{% tab header="other Kubernetes server" %}}

  ```shell
  docker tag extension-server:latest $YOUR_DOCKER_REPO
  docker push $YOUR_DOCKER_REPO
  ```

  {{% /tab %}}
  {{< /tabpane >}}

* Deploy the extension server in your cluster

  If you are using your own docker image repository, make sure to update the `values.yaml` with the correct
image name and tag.

  ```shell
  helm install -n envoy-gateway-system extension-server ./examples/extension-server/charts/extension-server
  ```

### Configure Envoy Gateway

* Grant Envoy Gateway's `ServiceAccount` permission to access the extension server's CRD

  ```shell
  kubectl create clusterrole listener-context-example-status-update \
             --verb=update  \
             --resource=ListenerContextExample/status

  kubectl create clusterrole listener-context-example-viewer \
             --verb=get,list,watch  \
             --resource=ListenerContextExample

  kubectl create clusterrolebinding envoy-gateway-listener-context \
             --clusterrole=listener-context-example-viewer \
             --serviceaccount=envoy-gateway-system:envoy-gateway

  kubectl create clusterrolebinding envoy-gateway-listener-context-status \
             --clusterrole=listener-context-example-status-update \
             --serviceaccount=envoy-gateway-system:envoy-gateway
  ```

* Configure Envoy Gateway to use the Extension Server

  Add the following fragment to Envoy Gateway's configmap:

  ```shell
  cat <<EOF | kubectl apply -f -
  apiVersion: v1
  kind: ConfigMap
  metadata:
    name: envoy-gateway-config
    namespace: envoy-gateway-system
  data:
    envoy-gateway.yaml: |
      apiVersion: gateway.envoyproxy.io/v1alpha1
      kind: EnvoyGateway
      provider:
        type: Kubernetes
      gateway:
        controllerName: gateway.envoyproxy.io/gatewayclass-controller
      extensionManager:
        # Envoy Gateway will watch these resource kinds and use them as extension policies
        # which can be attached to Gateway resources.
        policyResources:
        - group: example.extensions.io
          version: v1alpha1
          kind: ListenerContextExample
        hooks:
          # The type of hooks that should be invoked
          xdsTranslator:
            post:
            - HTTPListener
        service:
          # The service that is hosting the extension server
          fqdn:
            hostname: extension-server.envoy-gateway-system.svc.cluster.local
            port: 5005
  EOF
  ```

  After updating Envoy Gateway's configmap, restart Envoy Gateway.

## Testing

Get the Gateway's address:

```shell
export GATEWAY_HOST=$(kubectl get gateway/eg -o jsonpath='{.status.addresses[0].value}')
```

The extension server adds the Basic Authentication HTTP filter to all listeners configured by 
Envoy Gateway. Initially there are no valid user/password combinations available. Accessing the
example backend should fail with a 401 status:

```console
$ curl -v --header "Host: www.example.com" "http://${GATEWAY_HOST}/example"
...
> GET /example HTTP/1.1
> Host: www.example.com
> User-Agent: curl/7.81.0
> Accept: */*
> 
* Mark bundle as not supporting multiuse
< HTTP/1.1 401 Unauthorized
< www-authenticate: Basic realm="http://www.example.com/example"
< content-length: 58
< content-type: text/plain
< date: Mon, 08 Jul 2024 10:53:11 GMT
< 
...
User authentication failed. Missing username and password.
...
```

Add a new Username/Password combination using the example extension server's CRD:

```shell
kubectl apply -f - << EOF 
apiVersion: example.extensions.io/v1alpha1
kind: ListenerContextExample
metadata:
  name: listeneruser
spec:
  targetRefs:
  - kind: Gateway
    name: eg
    group: gateway.networking.k8s.io
  username: user
  password: p@ssw0rd
EOF
```

Authenticating with this user/password combination will now work.

```console
$ curl -v http://${GATEWAY_HOST}/example  -H "Host: www.example.com"   --user 'user:p@ssw0rd'
...
> GET /example HTTP/1.1
> Host: www.example.com
> Authorization: Basic dXNlcm5hbWU6cEBzc3cwcmQ=
> User-Agent: curl/7.81.0
> Accept: */*
> 
* Mark bundle as not supporting multiuse
< HTTP/1.1 200 OK
< content-type: application/json
< x-content-type-options: nosniff
< date: Mon, 08 Jul 2024 10:56:17 GMT
< content-length: 559
< 
...
 "headers": {
  "Authorization": [
   "Basic dXNlcm5hbWU6cEBzc3cwcmQ="
  ],
  "X-Example-Ext": [
   "user"
  ],
...
```


[xDS]: https://www.envoyproxy.io/docs/envoy/latest/intro/arch_overview/operations/dynamic_configuration
[design documentation]: /contributions/design/extending-envoy-gateway
[SecurityPolicy]: /latest/api/extension_types/#securitypolicy
