---
date: 2024-03-14
title: Announcing Envoy Gateway’s 1.0 Release!
linkTitle: Announcing Envoy Gateway’s 1.0 Release
description: > v1.0.0 is here !
  
author:  Alice Wasko (Ambassador Labs), Arko Dasgupta (Tetrate), Congqi Zhu (CECloud), Guy Daich (SAP), Huabing Zhao (Tetrate), Jianpeng He (Tetrate), Xunzhuo Liu (Tencent)
---

Nearly two years ago the Envoy Community set out to make it easy to use Envoy for managing North-South traffic. In that [original post introducing the project](https://blog.envoyproxy.io/introducing-envoy-gateway-ad385cc59532), Matt outlined the project’s goals:
* Build around the (then emerging) Kubernetes Gateway API
* Provide an experience with common functionality out of the box, that is simple to configure and understand, and that emphasizes making lifecycle management and operations easy for everyone
* Offer an extensible API so the community and vendors can continue to drive the project forward, and start their own changes and features without needing to fork the project
* Great docs with a goal of making common use cases trivial for users

We’re ecstatic to announce the 1.0 release of Envoy Gateway today – the culmination of two years of work by more than 90 contributors focused on realizing the goals Matt originally set forth. We are confident Envoy Gateway meets these goals, and is ready for widespread adoption in production.

## How We Got Here

It feels like a whirlwind with the project evolving so quickly and new contributors getting involved. In late 2022, not long after the community began work, Envoy Gateway passed the entire Kubernetes Gateway API conformance suite for the first time.

Since then we’ve helped lead the way in furthering the development of Gateway API. We also built configuration escape valves to unblock early adopters and enable us to understand target use cases from the community.

By 2023 that strategy was paying off, giving the community data and confidence to introduce extensions to Envoy Gateway and the Gateway API to tackle the client, backend, and security challenges early adopters were facing. Today, more than 90 contributors, as well as our early production adopters, have helped the project reach a milestone of production readiness for the project. We think Envoy Gateway is ready for prime time.

## Envoy Gateway 1.0

The 1.0 release brings a lot of functionality. In addition to implementing the full Kubernetes Gateway API – including the awesome Envoy L7 features you love like per-request policy, load balancing, and best-in-class observability – it also goes further:
* EG eases operations and lifecycle management by deploying and upgrading Envoy on your behalf
* Provides support for common North-South features like Rate Limiting and OAuth2 as first-class citizens with proper APIs
* Introduces extensions to the Kubernetes Gateway API to add additional [Client](https://gateway.envoyproxy.io/v1.0.0/api/extension_types/#clienttrafficpolicy), [Backend](https://gateway.envoyproxy.io/v1.0.0/api/extension_types/#backendtrafficpolicy), and [Security](https://gateway.envoyproxy.io/v1.0.0/api/extension_types/#securitypolicy) settings and features
* Provides the [EnvoyPatchPolicy](https://gateway.envoyproxy.io/v1.0.0/user/extensibility/envoy-patch-policy/) API to allow you to configure any Envoy behavior (including stuff you build yourself!)
* A CLI, [egctl](https://gateway.envoyproxy.io/v1.0.0/user/operations/egctl/), for interacting with and debugging the system
* A large (and growing!) set of user guides to make common use cases trivial to implement

You can get started by [checking out the user guides yourself](https://gateway.envoyproxy.io/v1.0.0/user/)!

## What Does 1.0 Mean for the Project?
We won’t be slowing down on feature velocity – if anything, we expect more features to ship as many users who have been following the project and waiting on the GA release get involved.. For us, 1.0 means two big things:
* A commitment to ensuring stability with releases for CVE fixes. From 1.0 onwards you can have confidence that the configuration you write today will continue to work in the same way for the foreseeable future.
* That the community is confident in the system's readiness for general use by everyone, not just Envoy experts.

## What’s Next?

Following the 1.0 release, we’ll be focusing on:
* Continuing to improve the journey to production and operability of the system
* Better metrics dashboards for control plane and data plane observability
* Exposing more knobs to fine tuning more traffic shaping parameters
* More API Gateway features such as authorization (IP Addresses, JWT Claims, API Key, etc.) and compression
* Building out a performance benchmarking tool into our CI
* Extending Envoy - we plan on providing a first-class API for data plane extensions such as Lua, WASM, and Ext Proc to enable users to implement their custom use cases
* Running Envoy Gateway in non-k8s environments - this has been an [explicit goal](https://gateway.envoyproxy.io/v1.0.0/contributions/design/goals/#all-environments) and we’d like to focus on this in the coming months. Envoy Proxy already supports running on bare metal environments, with Envoy Gateway users getting the added advantage of a simpler API
* And a lot of debugging capabilities with the [egctl CLI](https://gateway.envoyproxy.io/v1.0.0/user/operations/egctl/)

## Get Started
If you’ve been looking to use Envoy as a Gateway, check out our [quickstart guide](https://gateway.envoyproxy.io/v1.0.0/user/quickstart/) and give it a try! If you’re interested in contributing, check out our [guide for getting involved](https://gateway.envoyproxy.io/v1.0.0/contributions/)!
