---
title: Announcing Envoy Gateway v1.3
subtitle: Minor Update
linktitle: Release v1.3
description: Envoy Gateway v1.3 release announcement.
publishdate: 2025-01-30
release: v1.3.0
skip_list: true
---

We are thrilled to announce the arrival of Envoy Gateway v1.3.0.

This release represents a significant achievement, and we extend our heartfelt gratitude to the entire Envoy Gateway community for their contributions, dedication, and support. Your collaborative efforts have been instrumental in reaching this pivotal release.

Thank you for being an integral part of this journey. We are excited to see how Envoy Gateway v1.4.0 will empower your operations and look forward to continuing our work together to drive the future of Cloud Native API Gateway.

| [Release Notes][] | [Docs][docs] | [Compatibility Matrix][matrix] | [Install][] |
|-------------------|--------------|--------------------------------|--------------|

## What's New

The release adds a ton of features and functionality. Here are some highlights:

---

## 🚨 Breaking Changes

- **Envoy Readiness Port**: A dedicated listener port (`19003`) is now used for Envoy proxy readiness.
- **Access Log Format**: The default access log now uses the Envoy JSON formatter instead of the plain text formatter.
- **xDS Snapshot Behavior**: Envoy Gateway now skips xDS snapshot updates if errors occur during xDS translation.
- **Extension Manager Behavior**:
  - If `failOpen` is set to `true`, translation errors are logged and suppressed (same as before).
  - If `failOpen` is set to `false`, Envoy Gateway will **skip** xDS updates for affected resources instead of replacing them.

---

## ✨ New Features

### API & Traffic Management Enhancements
TODO:

### Security Enhancements
TODO:

### Observability & Tracing
TODO:

### Infra
TODO:

### Extensibility
TODO:

---

## 🐞 Bug Fixes

- Fixed traffic splitting when filters are attached to the `backendRef`.
- Added support for `Secret` and `ConfigMap` parsing in standalone mode.
- Bypassed overload manager for stats and ready listeners.
- Fixed translation of `backendSettings` for external authorization.
- Fixed an issue where the stats compressor was not working.
- Added support for [BackendTLSPolicy] and [EnvoyExtensionPolicy] parsing in standalone mode.
- Re-triggered reconciliation when a `backendRef` of type `ServiceImport` is updated or when `EndpointSlice` resources for a `ServiceImport` are updated.
- Fixed missing error logs and returns in the Kubernetes Reconcile method when a `GatewayClass` is not accepted.
- Allowed empty text field for OpenTelemetry sink when using JSON format.
- Fixed an issue where `SamplingFraction` was not working.
- Fixed Kubernetes resources not being deleted when a custom name was used.
- Prevented essential resources like `Namespace` from being treated as missing when loading from file.
- Avoided setting retriable status codes to 503 when `RetryOn` is configured in [BackendTrafficPolicy].
- Allowed the offline Kubernetes controller to use non-default CRDs.
- Fixed an issue when merging a route with multiple `parentRefs`.
- Fixed reconciliation logic to continue processing all `GatewayClasses` even after an error with one.
- Fixed topology injector blocking the Envoy proxy from starting.
- Increased the shutdown-manager's `failureThreshold` to 10 to ensure Envoy restarts before shutdown-manager in case of transient network issues.
- Fixed an issue where a `ReferenceGrant` from a [SecurityPolicy] to a referenced `remoteJWKS` backend was not respected.
- Added validation for header values.
- Added validation to prevent duplicated API keys in API Key Auth.
- Fixed [HTTPRoute] precedence by correctly considering header and query match types.
- Ensured the TLS inspector filter is only added to TCP listeners (not UDP/QUIC) when HTTP/3 is enabled via [ClientTrafficPolicy].

---

## ⚠️ Vulnerabilities

- Fixed CVE-2025-25294.

---

## ⚙️ Other Notable Changes

TODO:

[BackendTrafficPolicy]: https://gateway.envoyproxy.io/docs/api/extension_types/#backendtrafficpolicy
[EnvoyProxy]: https://gateway.envoyproxy.io/docs/api/extension_types/#envoyproxy
[EnvoyGateway]: https://gateway.envoyproxy.io/docs/api/extension_types/#envoygateway
[ClientTrafficPolicy]: https://gateway.envoyproxy.io/docs/api/extension_types/#clienttrafficpolicy
[SecurityPolicy]: https://gateway.envoyproxy.io/docs/api/extension_types/#securitypolicy
[EnvoyExtensionPolicy]: https://gateway.envoyproxy.io/docs/api/extension_types/#envoyextensionpolicy
[HTTPRoute]: https://gateway.envoyproxy.io/docs/api/gateway_api/httproute
[BackendTLSPolicy]: https://gateway.envoyproxy.io/docs/api/gateway_api/backendtlspolicy/

[Release Notes]: ./notes/v1.4.0
[matrix]: ./matrix
[docs]: /v1.4/
[Install]: /v1.4/install
