site/content/en/latest/tasks/observability/proxy-metric.md, before:

---
title: "Proxy Metrics"
---

Envoy Gateway offers observability for both the Control Plane and the underlying Envoy Proxy instances.
This task shows you how to configure proxy metrics.

## Prerequisites

{{< boilerplate o11y_prerequisites >}}

## Metrics

### Prometheus Metrics

To query metrics using Prometheus API, follow the steps below.

```shell
export PROMETHEUS_PORT=$(kubectl get service prometheus -n monitoring -o jsonpath='{.spec.ports[0].port}')
kubectl port-forward service/prometheus -n monitoring 19001:$PROMETHEUS_PORT
```

Query metrics using Prometheus API:

```shell
curl -s 'http://localhost:19001/api/v1/query?query=topk(1,envoy_cluster_upstream_cx_connect_ms_sum)' | jq . 
```

To directly view the metrics in Prometheus format from the Envoy's `/stats/prometheus` 
[admin endpoint](https://www.envoyproxy.io/docs/envoy/latest/operations/admin), follow the steps below.

```shell
export ENVOY_POD_NAME=$(kubectl get pod -n envoy-gateway-system --selector=gateway.envoyproxy.io/owning-gateway-namespace=default,gateway.envoyproxy.io/owning-gateway-name=eg -o jsonpath='{.items[0].metadata.name}')
kubectl port-forward pod/$ENVOY_POD_NAME -n envoy-gateway-system 19001:19001
```

View the metrics:

```shell
curl localhost:19001/stats/prometheus  | grep "default/backend/rule/0"
```

If you are only using the OpenTelemetry sink, you might want to set the `telemetry.metrics.prometheus.disable` to `true`
in the _EnvoyProxy CRD_ as shown in the following command.

```yaml
cat <<EOF | kubectl apply -f -
apiVersion: gateway.networking.k8s.io/v1
kind: GatewayClass
metadata:
  name: eg
spec:
  controllerName: gateway.envoyproxy.io/gatewayclass-controller
  parametersRef:
    group: gateway.envoyproxy.io
    kind: EnvoyProxy
    name: prometheus
    namespace: envoy-gateway-system
---
apiVersion: gateway.envoyproxy.io/v1alpha1
kind: EnvoyProxy
metadata:
  name: prometheus
  namespace: envoy-gateway-system
spec:
  telemetry:
    metrics:
      prometheus:
        disable: true
EOF
```

To completely remove Prometheus resources from the cluster, set the `prometheus.enabled` Helm value to `false`.

```shell
helm upgrade eg-addons oci://docker.io/envoyproxy/gateway-addons-helm --version {{< helm-version >}} -n monitoring --set prometheus.enabled=false 
```

### OpenTelemetry Metrics

Envoy Gateway can export metrics to an OpenTelemetry sink. Use the following command to send metrics to the 
OpenTelemetry Collector. Ensure that the OpenTelemetry components are enabled, 
as mentioned in the [Prerequisites](#prerequisites).

```yaml
cat <<EOF | kubectl apply -f -
apiVersion: gateway.networking.k8s.io/v1
kind: GatewayClass
metadata:
  name: eg
spec:
  controllerName: gateway.envoyproxy.io/gatewayclass-controller
  parametersRef:
    group: gateway.envoyproxy.io
    kind: EnvoyProxy
    name: otel-sink
    namespace: envoy-gateway-system
---
apiVersion: gateway.envoyproxy.io/v1alpha1
kind: EnvoyProxy
metadata:
  name: otel-sink
  namespace: envoy-gateway-system
spec:
  telemetry:
    metrics:
      sinks:
        - type: OpenTelemetry
          openTelemetry:
            host: otel-collector.monitoring.svc.cluster.local
            port: 4317
EOF
```

Temporarily enable the `debug` exporter in the OpenTelemetry Collector 
to view metrics in the pod logs using the following commands:

```shell
helm upgrade eg-addons oci://docker.io/envoyproxy/gateway-addons-helm --version {{< helm-version >}} -n monitoring --reuse-values --set opentelemetry-collector.config.service.pipelines.metrics.exporters='{debug,prometheus}'

```

To view the logs of the OpenTelemetry Collector, use the following command:

```shell
export OTEL_POD_NAME=$(kubectl get pod -n monitoring --selector=app.kubernetes.io/name=opentelemetry-collector -o jsonpath='{.items[0].metadata.name}')
kubectl logs -n monitoring -f $OTEL_POD_NAME --tail=100

```

Commit message:

docs: enable debug exporter in otel section.
Signed-off-by: sudipto baral <sudiptobaral.me@gmail.com>

site/content/en/latest/tasks/observability/proxy-metric.md, after:

---
title: "Proxy Metrics"
---

Envoy Gateway offers observability for both the Control Plane and the underlying Envoy Proxy instances.
This task shows you how to configure proxy metrics.

## Prerequisites

{{< boilerplate o11y_prerequisites >}}

## Metrics

### Prometheus Metrics

To query metrics using Prometheus API, follow the steps below.

```shell
export PROMETHEUS_PORT=$(kubectl get service prometheus -n monitoring -o jsonpath='{.spec.ports[0].port}')
kubectl port-forward service/prometheus -n monitoring 19001:$PROMETHEUS_PORT
```

Query metrics using Prometheus API:

```shell
curl -s 'http://localhost:19001/api/v1/query?query=topk(1,envoy_cluster_upstream_cx_connect_ms_sum)' | jq . 
```

To directly view the metrics in Prometheus format from the Envoy's `/stats/prometheus` 
[admin endpoint](https://www.envoyproxy.io/docs/envoy/latest/operations/admin), follow the steps below.

```shell
export ENVOY_POD_NAME=$(kubectl get pod -n envoy-gateway-system --selector=gateway.envoyproxy.io/owning-gateway-namespace=default,gateway.envoyproxy.io/owning-gateway-name=eg -o jsonpath='{.items[0].metadata.name}')
kubectl port-forward pod/$ENVOY_POD_NAME -n envoy-gateway-system 19001:19001
```

View the metrics:

```shell
curl localhost:19001/stats/prometheus  | grep "default/backend/rule/0"
```

If you are only using the OpenTelemetry sink, you might want to set the `telemetry.metrics.prometheus.disable` to `true`
in the _EnvoyProxy CRD_ as shown in the following command.

```yaml
cat <<EOF | kubectl apply -f -
apiVersion: gateway.networking.k8s.io/v1
kind: GatewayClass
metadata:
  name: eg
spec:
  controllerName: gateway.envoyproxy.io/gatewayclass-controller
  parametersRef:
    group: gateway.envoyproxy.io
    kind: EnvoyProxy
    name: prometheus
    namespace: envoy-gateway-system
---
apiVersion: gateway.envoyproxy.io/v1alpha1
kind: EnvoyProxy
metadata:
  name: prometheus
  namespace: envoy-gateway-system
spec:
  telemetry:
    metrics:
      prometheus:
        disable: true
EOF
```

To completely remove Prometheus resources from the cluster, set the `prometheus.enabled` Helm value to `false`.

```shell
helm upgrade eg-addons oci://docker.io/envoyproxy/gateway-addons-helm --version {{< helm-version >}} -n monitoring --set prometheus.enabled=false 
```

### OpenTelemetry Metrics

Envoy Gateway can export metrics to an OpenTelemetry sink. Use the following command to send metrics to the 
OpenTelemetry Collector. Ensure that the OpenTelemetry components are enabled, 
as mentioned in the [Prerequisites](#prerequisites).

```yaml
cat <<EOF | kubectl apply -f -
apiVersion: gateway.networking.k8s.io/v1
kind: GatewayClass
metadata:
  name: eg
spec:
  controllerName: gateway.envoyproxy.io/gatewayclass-controller
  parametersRef:
    group: gateway.envoyproxy.io
    kind: EnvoyProxy
    name: otel-sink
    namespace: envoy-gateway-system
---
apiVersion: gateway.envoyproxy.io/v1alpha1
kind: EnvoyProxy
metadata:
  name: otel-sink
  namespace: envoy-gateway-system
spec:
  telemetry:
    metrics:
      sinks:
        - type: OpenTelemetry
          openTelemetry:
            host: otel-collector.monitoring.svc.cluster.local
            port: 4317
EOF
```

Temporarily enable the `debug` exporter in the OpenTelemetry Collector 
to view metrics in the pod logs using the following command. Debug exporter is enabled for demonstration purposes and
should not be used in production.

```shell
helm upgrade eg-addons oci://docker.io/envoyproxy/gateway-addons-helm --version {{< helm-version >}} -n monitoring --reuse-values --set opentelemetry-collector.config.service.pipelines.metrics.exporters='{debug,prometheus}'

```

To view the logs of the OpenTelemetry Collector, use the following command:

```shell
export OTEL_POD_NAME=$(kubectl get pod -n monitoring --selector=app.kubernetes.io/name=opentelemetry-collector -o jsonpath='{.items[0].metadata.name}')
kubectl logs -n monitoring -f $OTEL_POD_NAME --tail=100

```
