---
title: "v1.4.0-rc.1"
publishdate: 2025-05-01
---

Date: May 1, 2025

## Breaking Changes

- Use a dedicated listener port (19003) for EnvoyProxy readiness.
- Use the Envoy JSON formatter for the default access log instead of the text formatter.
- EnvoyGateway now skips xDS snapshot updates in case of errors during xDS translation.
- When the Extension Manager is configured to Fail Open, translation errors are logged and suppressed.
- When the Extension Manager is configured not to Fail Open, Envoy Gateway will no longer replace affected resources. Instead, the xDS snapshot update is skipped.

## Security Updates

- Fixed CVE-2025-25294.

## New Features

- Added support for configuring `maxUnavailable` in `KubernetesPodDisruptionBudgetSpec`.
- Added support for percentage-based request mirroring.
- Added support for `matchExpressions` in `TargetSelector`.
- Added a defaulter for Gateway API resources loaded from files to set default values.
- Added support for defining Lua EnvoyExtensionPolicies.
- Added a `RequestID` field in `ClientTrafficPolicy.HeaderSettings` to configure Envoy’s `X-Request-ID` behavior.
- Added support for HorizontalPodAutoscaler in the Helm chart.
- Added support for distinct header and distinct source CIDR-based local rate limiting.
- Added support for forwarding the authenticated username to the backend via a configurable header in `BasicAuth`.
- Added support for HTTP Methods and Headers-based authorization in `SecurityPolicy`.
- Added support for zone-aware routing.
- Added support for `BackendTLSPolicy` to target `ServiceImport`.
- Added support for the `kubernetes.io/h2c` application protocol in `ServiceImport`.
- Added support for per-host circuit breaker thresholds.
- Added support for injecting credentials from a Kubernetes Secret into a request header. Credentials can be injected using either an `HTTPRouteFilter` or a `BackendRef` filter.
- Added support for `egctl` WebSocket in addition to SPDY.
- Added a Helm chart configuration option to set the `TrafficDistribution` field in the Envoy Gateway Service.
- Added support for setting the Envoy Proxy log level to `trace`.
- Added support for global `imageRegistry` and `imagePullSecrets` in the Helm chart.
- Added support for using a local JWKS (inline string or in a `ConfigMap`) to validate JWT tokens in `SecurityPolicy`.
- Added support for logging resource statuses in standalone mode.
- Added support for per-route tracing in `BackendTrafficPolicy`.
- Added support for configuring retry settings for Extension Service hooks in `EnvoyGateway` config.
- Added support for request buffering using the Envoy Buffer filter.
- Added support for the `merge` type in `BackendTrafficPolicy`.
- Added support for the `OverlappingTLSConfig` condition in Gateway status. This condition is set if there are overlapping hostnames or certificates between listeners. The ALPN protocol is set to `HTTP/1.1` for overlapping listeners to avoid HTTP/2 Connection Coalescing.

## Bug Fixes

- Fixed traffic splitting when filters are attached to the `backendRef`.
- Added support for Secret and ConfigMap parsing in standalone mode.
- Bypassed overload manager for stats and ready listeners.
- Fixed translation of `backendSettings` for `extAuth`.
- Fixed an issue where the stats compressor was not working.
- Added support for `BackendTLSPolicy` and `EnvoyExtensionPolicy` parsing in standalone mode.
- Retriggered reconciliation when a `backendRef` of type `ServiceImport` is updated or when `EndpointSlice(s)` for a `ServiceImport` are updated.
- Fixed an issue where errors were not logged and returned in the Kubernetes Reconcile method when a `GatewayClass` is not accepted.
- Fixed allowing an empty text field for OpenTelemetry sink when using JSON format.
- Fixed an issue where `SamplingFraction` was not working.
- Fixed Kubernetes resources not being deleted when a customized name was used.
- No longer treating essential resources (e.g., `namespace`) as missing while loading from a file.
- No longer setting retriable status codes to `503` when `RetryOn` is configured in `BackendTrafficPolicy`.

## Performance Improvements

- Added a cache for Wasm OCI image permission checks and now checking `pullSecrets` against the OCI image registry in a background goroutine.

## Deprecations  

- Deprecated the `PreserveXRequestID` field.

## Other Changes  

- Updated gateway-api to v1.3.0.
