site/archetypes/concept.md, before:

---
title: "{{ replace .Name "-" " " | title }}"
---

## [Optional] Before you Begin
<!--
Add any hyperlinks to prerequisite concepts user should already be familiar with
-->

## Overview

<!-- 
Briefly introduce the concept. Keep it high-level and user-friendly.
What is it? Why does it matter? What problem does it solve?
Example: An `HTTPRoute` defines how HTTP traffic is routed to backend services in a Kubernetes environment.
-->

## Use Cases

<!-- 
Describe common use cases. When would someone need this concept?
List scenarios where understanding this will help the user make better architectural or operational decisions.
-->

## Configuration in Envoy Gateway

<!-- 
Explain the inner workings of the concept. 
Use diagrams, code snippets, or flow explanations as needed.
Example: Describe how Envoy Gateway interacts with Kubernetes Gateway API resources.
-->

## [Optional] Best Practices

<!-- 
Offer guidance on using the concept effectively. What should users keep in mind?
Mention common pitfalls or misconceptions to avoid.
-->

## Related Resources

<!-- 
Link to related conceptual docs, task-based guides, or reference material.
Example:
- [HTTPRoute Resource Reference](#)
- [Configuring a Gateway](#)
-->

Commit message:

slight change in subtitle of concept template to make section clearer
Signed-off-by: melsal13 <mmvsal13@gmail.com>

site/archetypes/concept.md, after:

---
title: "{{ replace .Name "-" " " | title }}"
---

## [Optional] Before you Begin
<!--
Add any hyperlinks to prerequisite concepts user should already be familiar with
-->

## Overview

<!-- 
Briefly introduce the concept. Keep it high-level and user-friendly.
What is it? Why does it matter? What problem does it solve?
Example: An `HTTPRoute` defines how HTTP traffic is routed to backend services in a Kubernetes environment.
-->

## Use Cases

<!-- 
Describe common use cases. When would someone need this concept?
List scenarios where understanding this will help the user make better architectural or operational decisions.
-->

## {Title} in Envoy Gateway

<!-- 
Replace Title with the name of the concept. 

Explain the inner workings of the concept. 
Use diagrams, code snippets, or flow explanations as needed.
Example: Describe how Envoy Gateway interacts with Kubernetes Gateway API resources.
-->

## [Optional] Best Practices

<!-- 
Offer guidance on using the concept effectively. What should users keep in mind?
Mention common pitfalls or misconceptions to avoid.
-->

## Related Resources

<!-- 
Link to related conceptual docs, task-based guides, or reference material.
Example:
- [HTTPRoute Resource Reference](#)
- [Configuring a Gateway](#)
-->
